--- PAGE 1 ---
Data Science and Engineering (2026) 11:30–52
https://doi.org/10.1007/s41019-025-00313-x
RESEARCH PAPERS
A Graph RAG Approach to Enhance Explainability in Dataset Discovery
Claudia Diamantini1 · Alessandro Mele1 · Alex Mircoli1 · Domenico Potena1 · Cristina Rossetti1,2 · Emanuele Storti1
Received: 16 February 2025 / Revised: 10 July 2025 / Accepted: 12 August 2025 / Published online: 13 November 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
Discovering relevant datasets in large, heterogeneous data ecosystems, such as Data Lakes or Data spaces, is a complex
task, often hindered by a lack of transparency and user-centric explanations in the discovery process. Explainability is
critical for enabling users to understand why specific datasets are recommended, what information they contain, and
how they align with user-defined criteria and preferences. To address these challenges, this work proposes a novel Graph
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (Graph RAG) framework to enhance explainability in a platform for discovery of sum-
mary data sources. The proposed approach leverages a Knowledge Graph (KG) to interpret user requests, extracting
relevant contextual information. These enriched requests are then transformed by a Large Language Model (LLM) into
actionable dataset queries for a dataset discovery platform. Candidate solutions are evaluated and enriched with statisti-
cal insights on value distributions and contextual knowledge from the KG. Finally, the LLM ranks these solutions based
on user preferences, producing a final report. This dual strategy of query enrichment and contextual explanation fosters
transparency and enhances user understanding of the discovery process. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the approach
through an experimental validation, highlighting its potential to improve both the accuracy and interpretability of dataset
discovery.
Keywords Dataset discovery · Knowledge graph · Retrieval augmentation generation · LLM · Multidimensional model
1 Introduction
In today’s data-driven landscape, organizations increas-
ingly rely on vast and heterogeneous collections of datas-
ets to support analytical and decision-making processes.
Enabling technologies feature both centralized Data Lakes
Emanuele Storti and decentralized Data Spaces, which have a great potential
e.storti@univpm.it
to facilitate data sharing and integration across organiza-
Claudia Diamantini tions, and offer flexible and scalable storage for diverse data
c.diamantini@univpm.it
sources. However, their flexibility introduces significant
Alessandro Mele challenges in data management [49], including achieving
a.mele@pm.univpm.it
full data interoperability and making sense of disparate data
Alex Mircoli through valuable and interpretable insights. Key factors in
a.mircoli@univpm.it
addressing these challenges include the ability to represent
Domenico Potena heterogeneous datasets and their metadata as a support for
d.potena@univpm.it
data governance, as well as to provide mechanisms for dis-
Cristina Rossetti covering, accessing, and analyzing relevant datasets. Over-
cristina.rossetti@polito.it
coming these challenges requires not only effective dataset
1 Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione, Università discovery approaches but also transparent and explainable
Politecnica delle Marche, via Brecce Bianche, systems that help users understand why specific datasets are
Ancona 60131, Italy relevant to their queries and how they align with analyti-
2 Dipartimento di Automatica e Informatica, Politecnico di cal goals. As a matter of fact, providing clear, user-centric
Torino, Corso Duca degli Abruzzi, 24, Torino 10129, Italy
1 3

--- PAGE 2 ---
A Graph RAG Approach to Enhance Explainability in Dataset Discovery 31
explanations is indeed crucial for improving transparency, sources capable of addressing the user request, are further
facilitating informed decision-making, and enabling effec- enriched with detailed metadata, including value distribu-
tive utilization of data resources. While explainability is a tions (e.g., the percentage of records associated with a spe-
key aspect of dataset discovery, it remains underexplored in cific value) and semantic relationships (e.g., hierarchical
most existing systems. Current solutions do not often ade- groupings of entities, such as Italy being part of Europe).
quately contextualize results and, when multiple datasets These enriched results are then processed by the LLM for
meet query criteria, users are left with little support in com- ranking them based on explicit user preferences, ensuring
paring alternatives or understanding the content and struc- alignment with analytical priorities (e.g., datasets focused
ture of the results and the relevance to their requests. This on European countries). By integrating this dual-layered
is particularly critical for huge repositories of summary data approach of query contextualization and result enrichment,
sources, namely datasets including statistical content. Such the proposed framework is capable of both interpreting user
peculiar data sources are characterized by a set of measures requests related to dataset discovery and addressing the crit-
(also called indicators in the following), that is data of inter- ical need for result explainability. This also aligns with the
est for the analysis that are aggregated along a number of principles of Data Spaces by promoting semantic interop-
dimensions, typically at different granularities called levels. erability, contextual enrichment, and transparency in data
Such data sources are also termed data cubes. The integra- governance processes [33].
tion of different data cubes may be done by joining data The contributions of this paper are as follows:
items on the (sub-) set of dimensions, in order to compare
and analyse different measures. Inconsistent, sparse, or ● we define a Knowledge Graph representation model.
noisy data cubes are more the rule than an exception, and Part of the graph captures static (1) background knowl-
can make data discovery and integration a time-consuming edge, including definitions of dimensions and indica-
and frustrating endeavor. tors. Another part describes dynamic (2) source-related
Let us consider for example a set of data sources related knowledge including metadata for the characterization
to global pollution, and let us suppose a user wants to of data sources, including source profiles, i.e., summary
compare particulate matter emissions, namely PM and representations of their content aligned with the KG.
2.5
PM 10 , on different countries and years, focusing in particu- ● We introduce a novel Graph RAG approach that inte-
lar on European countries and the last 3 years. Besides tradi- grates Knowledge Graphs and LLMs to contextualize
tional issues like schema heterogeneity (e.g. PM column and enrich the user request. The LLM is exploited for
2.5
can be named particulate_matter_2.5 in a source, and multiple objectives: (1) to translate the user request,
Fine_particulate_matter on another) the production of expressed in natural language, in a properly formatted
data at different pace, or at different aggregation levels can query delivered to the dataset discovery platform, (2) to
make the integration of apparently joinable sources a useless filter and rank the results according to the user prefer-
effort, producing a table formed of very few results, and/ ences and (3) to enhance the explainability of dataset
or concentrated on ranges of level values of little interest. discovery results by providing statistical and semantic
Hence, in the presence of different alternatives, discovery insights to users.
should be able to return the user a list of possible alternative ● We perform an experimental evaluation of the proposed
datasets, ranked by relevance with respect to user preference approach, comparing multiple LLMs and different sce-
(such as prioritizing datasets covering countries in Europe narios to assess its effectiveness across key dimensions,
and years 2023-2025, and be able to explain the adopted including the correctness of the provided ranking and
criteria in a synthetic, user-comprehensible form. its explainability, in terms of coherence, general quality
To address these issues, we propose a novel approach to and compactness of the responses.
enhance explainability in a platform for discovering sum-
mary data sources, that combines the expressive capabilities The manuscript extends previous work on dataset discov-
of Knowledge Graphs (KGs) and advanced Natural Lan- ery [13] by extending the representation capabilities of the
guage Processing through a Graph Retrieval-Augmented Knowledge Graph and by building a Graph RAG solution
Generation (RAG) approach. A KG is leveraged to inter- upon it , leveraging the Knowledge Graph to extract relevant
pret and contextualize user requests expressed in natural contextual information. This helps to improve the usability,
language, extracting dimensions, levels, and indicators precision and interpretability of dataset recommendations.
relevant to the request. This enriched query is then trans- A further extension involves integrating user preferences in
lated by a Large Language Model (LLM) into actionable the request, ensuring the results align with specific analyti-
dataset queries targeting the dataset discovery platform. The cal goals.
query results, in terms of alternative combinations of data
1 3

--- PAGE 3 ---
32 C. Diamantini et al.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 unionable with a search table T on some subset of attributes,
reviews related work in dataset discovery, explainability of by considering the similarity between domains and values
human-agent systems, Knowledge Graphs, and the use of of the attributes. The approach relies on Locality-Sensitive
Graph RAG. Section 3 describes the data model of the plat- Hashing (LSH, Zhu et al. [57]) to obtain an approximate yet
form, while Sect. 4 discusses the proposed methodology, efficient solution. Other work focuses on joinable dataset
detailing the Graph RAG framework and its components. search, e.g., D3L [6] in which both schema– and instance–
Section 5 evaluates its performance through experiments. based features are used [44], or Auctus [8] where data sum-
Finally, Sect. 6 concludes the paper and outlines future maries are in part exploited. Finally, some papers propose
research directions. a query-based search, which relies on a specific query lan-
guage and a model, that in most cases is a graph [9, 17,
19]. As an example, a Knowledge Graph is exploited in
2 Related Work Aurum [9] to profile the data sources in a repository and
find similarity-based relationships and primary-foreign key
Modern data ecosystems demand robust mechanisms candidates. For each column, a profile is built by generat-
enabling end-users to collect, explore, and analyze data ing signatures from extracted information (e.g., cardinality,
sources suited to their specific needs. The effectiveness of data distribution, MinHash [7]). These signatures are then
these solutions is deeply influenced by how metadata asso- indexed using Locality-Sensitive Hashing: if two columns
ciated with data sources is managed. Metadata models play share a bucket, an edge is created between the correspond-
a pivotal role in representing essential information such as ing nodes, with the similarity value as the edge weight.
data provenance, structure, semantics, and relationships, Users can then search datasets using a Source Retrieval
thereby facilitating advanced dataset discovery functional- Query Language. The KGLac architecture [19] enhances
ities and enhancing result explainability. Metadata, in the data discovery operations, such as schema similarity search
form of a graph, can then be leveraged to enrich Retrieval- or joinable tables discovery, through a Knowledge Graph
Augmented Generation for LLMs, ultimately aimed to where stored relationships are computed exploiting meta-
deliver more relevant results and foster a deeper under- data by a data profiler which calculates content-based and
standing of the relationships and patterns within metadata. semantic-based embeddings of datasets.
In the following, we survey relevant related literature on A related problem is the correlated dataset search, where
these topics. an additional challenge arises: besides identifying possible
joins, it is also necessary to compute, or estimate, the join-
2.1 Dataset Discovery and Exploration ability (or correlation). As a measure of joinability, most
approaches propose the Jaccard Index and the Jaccard Con-
Dataset discovery is the process which allows users to find tainment similarity. While some algorithms provide an exact
data sources that are relevant to a user query. This process solution to the problem, e.g., JOSIE [58], scalability issues
can be challenging for several reasons, such as the hetero- can be addressed by providing approximate answers, e.g.,
geneities of data sources or the huge amount of stored data. Lazo [16], Asymmetric MinWise Hashing (ALSH, Shrivas-
Additionally, the user might not know in advance what to tava and Li [48]) and LSH Ensemble [57], balancing preci-
specifically search, therefore tools to effectively support the sion and recall. Such techniques apply indexing structures
end users in discovering new data sources are needed. and data sketches (typically through hashing) to reduce the
The simplest approach for dataset discovery, widely dimensionality of the datasets and perform time-effective
employed by data repositories and for web tables, relies on estimation of the Jaccard index or the containment set. In
keyword search. This method can be applied to metadata or, a previous work of ours [13], we presented a framework
when accessible, to the dataset’s source content (see survey for analytic query-driven dataset discovery in Data Lakes,
by Chapman et al. [10]). In a second group of approaches, focusing on LSH Ensemble-based efficient integration and
the input for the search is represented by a dataset, which mapping of summary data sources to a Knowledge Graph,
can be provided by the user or produced as a result of a which serves as a global model following a Local-as-View
previous analysis task. In this way, source integration and approach. Analytic queries are expressed in terms of target
source discovery are addressed in a combined way, follow- indicators and relevant dimensions, and the system identi-
ing the idea of finding datasets that are similar to a query fies combination of suitable data sources. Compared to the
dataset and that can be integrated in some way (either by mentioned approaches, the framework is capable of pre-
joins, unions or aggregates). For instance, in the context of selecting only relevant sources by exploiting mappings,
open datasets, Table Union Search [34] aims at identify- avoiding pair-wise comparisons among a large number of
ing the k tables that have the highest likelihood of being sources.
1 3

--- PAGE 4 ---
A Graph RAG Approach to Enhance Explainability in Dataset Discovery 33
2.2 Explainability in Human-Agent Systems 2.3 Data Models and Vocabularies for Profile
Representation
In the domain of human-agent interaction, explainability
has emerged as a critical non-functional requirement, essen- Leveraging well-designed metadata models ensures that
tial for promoting transparency, accountability, and trust- data from diverse sources can be integrated, making it easier
worthiness. It also contributes to the overall usability and for users to navigate large and complex datasets within data
auditability of software systems [42]. Despite its recognized ecosystems. Therefore, the role of metadata management
importance, a precise and universally accepted definition of extends beyond simple documentation, functioning as a
explainability from a software engineering perspective is cornerstone for the usability, interpretation, and interopera-
currently missing. Likewise, systematic methods for its elic- bility of data systems. Effective data governance, therefore,
itation and validation are still under development, although requires a well-defined metadata model that aligns with the
recent efforts have attempted to conceptualize and model its FAIR principles (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and
various dimensions [5]. Reusable) [53]. In the context of Data Lake literature [45],
Research on explainability has predominantly gained functional metadata are classified by Oram et al. [37] as
momentum within the context of machine learning and arti- technical (i.e., data format, structure or schema), operational
ficial intelligence (e.g., XAI), where systems often produce (i.e., data location, file size, number of records) and busi-
non-deterministic outputs subject to generalization, abstrac- ness-related (i.e., field names and explanations), although
tion, inference, and ambiguity. Nevertheless, explainabil- such classes are not entirely distinct and can overlap [14].
ity is equally pertinent to other classes of systems, such as On the other hand, structural metadata are associated with
information retrieval and recommendation engines, espe- the concept of object, a generalization of a data source that
cially if they are supported by AI models, such as LLMs. can be structured (e.g., SQL tables), semi-structured (e.g.,
In these contexts, providing clear justifications for system XML, JSON), or unstructured (e.g., images, audio or video).
outputs, especially in relation to user queries or prefer- Metadata are also core components of other data-shar-
ences, is essential to ensuring the perceived appropriate- ing ecosystems like Data Space architectures. In fact,
ness and relevance of results. As several work report, e.g. Data Spaces add decentralized governance to Data Lakes,
Chapman et al. [10], even when users find a solution to a facilitating the sharing and exchange of data across differ-
query, they might struggle with issues like trustworthiness ent organizations without the need of a single, centralized
(e.g., concerns about data quality, accuracy, or reliability) repository. This makes FAIR principles even more impor-
or may encounter practical difficulties in using these data- tant and challenging.
sets, e.g. for unclear documentation. In these cases, much Several vocabularies and ontologies have been proposed
time risks to be devoted to examining and comparing results in the literature to describe (statistical) data sources [21].
[31]. To this aim, text summaries are often used, along with Among them, “Vocabulary of Interlinked Datasets” (VoID)1
summary statistics or visualisations, as a way to explain a is an RDF Schema vocabulary for expressing high-level
complex result to users. In particular, conversational search metadata about RDF datasets, such as the vocabularies used
and LLMs have proven particularly useful in cases where in the dataset and the size of the dataset. Similarly, Dublin
users have insufficient background knowledge [46]. In Core Metadata Initiative (DCMI) Terms2 aims at interoper-
more complex cases, the information retrieval task at hand able metadata descriptions for resources in the Web, also
may require an entire set of results from multiple different including basics data provenance metadata. RDF Data
sources with interdependencies, as in the case of a dataset Cube3 is an RDF Schema vocabulary based on the SDMX
discovery platform. To the best of our knowledge, however, standard designed for representing statistics in a multidi-
no prior work has explicitly addressed explainability as a mensional attribute space, while DCAT4 is an RDF vocabu-
first-class objective in dataset discovery. Existing methods lary designed to facilitate interoperability between data
often focus on usability or metadata-driven retrieval, but catalogues published on the Web. For each source within the
fall short of providing user-centered explanations justifying catalogue, some basic metadata are provided, i.e., resource
dataset recommendations. Indeed, existing dataset discov- URL, title, file type and dimension. For what concerns tools
ery platforms either provide no explanation of the results for statistics generation, LODstat [2] provides schema and
to the user or offer only very limited support, e.g., visual data statistics for RDF data sources, i.e., number of triples,
exploration of datasets is possible in Auctus [8], including
previews, summaries, and spatial visualizations but only for 1 https://www.w3.org/TR/void/.
single sources, while KGLac [19] offers entity-level trac- 2 h t t p s : / / w w w . d u b l i n c o r e . o r g / s p e c i fi c a t i o n s / d u b l i n - c o r e / d c m i - t e r m s /
ing through KG connections, and Aurum [9] supports prov- #.
enance and lineage tracing for each match. 3 h t t p s : / / w w w . w 3 . o r g / T R / v o c a b - d a t a - c u b e /.
4 h t t p s : / / w w w . w 3 . o r g / T R / v o c a b - d c a t - 3 /.
1 3

--- PAGE 5 ---
34 C. Diamantini et al.
triples containing blank nodes, or literal values with the verbosity and naturally represent connections between enti-
respective data types. PROLOD++ [1] is a tool for profil- ties (e.g., documents or complex objects). To combine the
ing and mining RDF data sources. Profiles provide statistics potential of graphs with traditional RAG, Graph Retrieval-
such as frequency counts and distributions related to sub- Augmented Generation (Graph RAG) techniques have
jects, predicates and objects. Similarly, RDFStats [28] is a been proposed in the literature [15, 23, 32]. According to
generator for statistics of RDF data sources, which provides Procko and Ochoa [40], Graph RAG techniques can be
histograms of classes, properties and value types. In Zhao categorized into three main types: Graph-Based Indexing,
et al. [56], a set of metadata to support data discovery and Graph-Guided Retrieval, and Graph-Enhanced Generation.
analysis in a Data Lake context are proposed. Metadata like Graph-Based Indexing techniques aim at constructing the
data types, distribution of values, relationships between data initial knowledge base, which can be achieved either by
sources such as similarities, are computed to provide users building the graph database from scratch for specific tasks
with a better understanding of data in order to select the or leveraging specific Web resources such as Open Knowl-
appropriate datasets for their purposes. A measure of simi- edge Graphs. A crucial aspect is the definition of indices
larity/dissimilarity among datasets is computed and stored between the entities, which helps improve the efficiency and
as a metadata to support dataset search. We emphasize that effectiveness of the search stage. Graph-Guided Retrieval,
the mentioned vocabularies and tools do not fully provide on the other hand, focuses on selecting the candidate graphs
support for the type of metadata we are interested in, since from external graph databases. Finally, Graph-Enhanced
they are not tailored to the description of the peculiar char- Generation aims to combine the retrieved graph data with
acteristics of multidimensional data sources, namely facts, the query to enhance the quality of the result. Graph RAG
indicators and dimensions. techniques are widely adopted in various NLP tasks, e.g.,
Question Answering (QA), Information Extraction, and Dia-
2.4 Graph-Based Retrieval-Augmented Generation logue systems [39]. Most of the literature in the Graph RAG
scenario is concerned with QA [40], traditionally addressed
Large Language Models (LLMs) marked a revolution in the by Knowledge Graphs. The combination of LLMs with
field of Natural Language Processing (NLP), due to their Knowledge Graph Question Answering (KGQA) frame-
capabilities in language processing and text generation. The works is a commonly researched application of RAG [3, 15,
training of an LLM consists of providing the model with 18, 47, 54]. Among them, G-Retriever [18] offers a flexible
large amounts of textual data (corpora) as input. However, QA framework to interact with a graph through a conver-
this paradigm suffers from certain issues: (i) the LLM will sational interface and addresses the issue of hallucination
incorporate the knowledge acquired up to that point, and with a Prize-Collecting Steiner Tree optimization problem.
(ii) since corpora are general-purpose texts, the model Bahr et al [3] developed a framework to leverage analytical
could easily fail into hallucinations [24] with domain-spe- and semantic QA capabilities on Failure Mode and Effects
cific queries. Since training LLMs is extremely expensive, Analysis (FMEA) data, by defining an ontology for FMEA
incorporating custom knowledge into them is a nontrivial observations, an algorithm for creating vector embeddings
challenge. Several solutions have been proposed in the lit- from the FMEA KG, and a KG enhanced RAG framework.
erature to address this problem, including fine-tuning, i.e., KG-RAG [43] is a framework for KGQA which derives a
training the LLM in a task-specific dataset [20, 22, 38, 41], Knowledge Graph from unstructured text and then performs
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG), i.e., enriching the information retrieval over it. The retrieval methodology
prompt with information extracted from external knowl- leverages the Chain of Explorations (CoE) algorithm which
edge bases [30], and prompt engineering, i.e., supporting benefits from LLMs reasoning to explore nodes and rela-
the model by providing detailed instructions for the task tionships within the Knowledge Graph sequentially.
[25, 52, 55]. RAG emerges as dominant solution, allowing
updates to the LLM knowledge base with no necessity of re-
training the model. Specifically, RAG dynamically queries 3 Data Model
external knowledge bases, extracts domain-specific knowl-
edge, and incorporates it into the LLM output. Although In this work, we consider a data ecosystem comprising mul-
RAG achieves excellent results and is widely used, it is tiple data sources. Since the focus is on summary/statistical
highly sensitive to noise in documents [40] and suffers from datasets, we assume a generic structure based on the mul-
some limitations in scenarios where documents are, in some tidimensional model [26], where indicators are described
way, interconnected each others, e.g., social media postings, along dimensional hierarchies. The approach relies on a
research papers [23, 39]. Graphs represent the candidate Knowledge Graph based on the RDF representation model.
data structures for modeling knowledge bases: they reduce The Knowledge Graph is structured in two distinct layers,
1 3

--- PAGE 6 ---
A Graph RAG Approach to Enhance Explainability in Dataset Discovery 35
called Background Knowledge Graph (BKG) and Source- Background knowledge is encoded in the BKG and is
related Knowledge Graph (SKG). The former provides defi- based on KPIOnto5, an OWL2-RL ontology that provides
nitions of indicators and dimensions, that constitute stable the terminology for defining indicators and some addi-
information within the data ecosystem. The latter provides tional properties (e.g., description, unit of measure, objec-
a description of source metadata, mappings to elements of tive), along with dimensional hierarchies and members.
BKG, as well as source profiling. As such, it is specific to In particular, class defines a level which
kpi:Level
each dataset and more subject to change. includes a number of s and belongs to a
kpi:Member
. The Object Property
kpi:Dimension kpi:rollUp
3.1 Background Knowledge Graph encodes the partial order relation among levels. In the bot-
tom of Fig. 2, an example is reported on the representation
Hereby, we provide the notions of dimension, related levels of the dimensional hierarchy for the dimension GEO, where
and members, and indicators. namespace “kpi” refers to KPIOnto and “bkg” to the BKG.
Definition 1 (Dimension) A dimension i D is a perspec- 3.2 Source-related Knowledge Graph
D ∈
tive of analysis and is defined as the set
D
i =
{
LD1 i,...,L Dn i
}
,
where LDj i is a (dimensional) level of
D
i
. We provide here the definition of data source and the notion
of profile, along with the description of the graph schema
adopted for their representation.
For the sake of simplicity, in the following we refer to a
dimensional level as L , when the dimension is clear from Definition 3 (Data Source) A data source is defined as
j
the context. Levels of are organized in a hierarchy S = a ,...,a where a S is an attribute and
i k 1 n i k
D { } ∈
through a partial order , a reflexive, antisymmetric, and ν(a )= v ,...,v is the set of values of a .
L i 1 m i
≤ { }
transitive relation defined over . To make an example,
i
D
given levels region and country of the geographic dimen- The characterization of a source includes also the indicators
sion (GEO), the relation region country holds. and levels of the Knowledge Graph which the attributes of
L
≤
Given a level L j , we denote by δ(L j )= { m L 1 j,...,m L q j } the source can be mapped to. With reference to the example
case, let us assume a data source includes attributes nation
the set of its members, i.e., elements of a level. Likewise, a
member will be denoted as m , whenever the dimensional and day that can be mapped respectively to the levels GEO.
p
country and TIME.day, and an attribute particulate_mat-
level it belongs to is evident from the context. For example,
Venice δ(city) states that Venice is a member of the level ter_2.5 that can be mapped to the indicator PM 2.5 . As dis-
∈
cussed in [13], mappings for dimensional attributes can be
city.
discovered in a semi-automatic fashion, leveraging approxi-
Given a dimension , levels L ,L and a partial mate solutions based on hashing schemes. This approach
i j
D ∈D
order relation on , a relation partOf can be identifies, for a given attribute a , the dimensional level
≤
L
D
Li,Lj i
defined among the set of corresponding members δ(L ) and L whose members δ(L ) most closely matches its values
i j j
δ(L ). This relation enables the roll-up operator along . ν(a ). We denote by ind(S ) and dim(S ) the set of indica-
j i k k
D
tors and dimensions of the Knowledge Graph, respectively,
Definition 2 (Indicator) An indicator ind is a quantita- that are mapped to attributes in S .
i k
∈I
tive measure that can be related to one or more dimensions A further relevant source-related information regards
j
D. a summary representation of the content of a data source,
D ∈
namely its profile.
In our example case about global pollution, background
knowledge consists of the geographical dimension (GEO) Definition 4 (Profile item) Given a dimension D, a
D ∈
and the temporal dimension (TIME). GEO is articulated in level L , a source S , an attribute a S mapped
j k i k
∈D ∈
a hierarchy composed of four dimensional levels (city to L and a member m δ(L ), the profile item of
L j p j
≤ ∈
region country continent), while TIME is composed a for the member m is defined as m ,y , where
L L i p p p
≤ ≤ ⟨ ⟩
of three dimensional levels (day month year). Fur- y = v ν(a ):v =m .
L L p i p
≤ ≤ |{ ∈ }|
thermore, some indicators are defined, namely CO , PM
2 2.5
and PM . We refer to Ψ(a )= m ,y ,..., m ,y as the pro-
10 i 1 1 n n
{⟨ ⟩ ⟨ ⟩}
file of the attribute a , i.e., the set of its profile items. The
i
5 https://w3id.org/kpionto/.
1 3

--- PAGE 7 ---
36 C. Diamantini et al.
profile represents the frequency with which each value of a as the number of dimensions are represented through the
i
occurs. It is defined only for attributes that can correctly be property , while the cardinality through the
dl:domains
mapped to dimensional levels. property . Further metadata include the file path
dl:items
Source-related knowledge is encoded in the SKG based of the data source ( ), provenance and lin-
dl:location
on an ontological vocabulary. The vocabulary defines eage information, and structural metadata. Structural meta-
classes and properties for the definition of a source, to data define each attribute as an instance of the
dl:Domain
represent its structure in terms of attributes, and to map class, with a connection with its source through the property
an attribute to the corresponding indicator or level in the .
dl:contains
BKG. The vocabulary allows for a uniform representa- Attributes related to an indicator or a dimension, on the
tion of heterogeneous sources. This accommodates both other hand, are instances of the class. A prop-
Domain
structured data sources (such as SQL databases) and semi- erty allows to map the attribute to a corresponding
mapTo
structured data sources (such as JSON or XML files) in a indicator or level in the BKG. This is exemplified in Fig.
consistent manner. This uniformity simplifies the integra- 2 for an attribute mapped to level GEO.country. A profile
tion and querying of diverse datasets, thus enhancing over- for a dimensional attribute is defined as an instance of the
all interoperability. An example is shown in Fig. 1, where class and includes summary information on its
DProfile
the prefix “dl” denotes the namespace for the vocabulary, value distribution as a set of (corre-
DProfileElement
while “skg” refers to the namespace of the SKG. Each data sponding to profile items). In turn, this is linked to a mem-
source is represented as an instance of the class, ber (property ) and a number of occurrences
Source toMember
which extends the class from the VoID (property ). A special profile element is
void:Dataset dl:frequency
vocabulary to provide enhanced integration capabilities. defined for all values that cannot be mapped to any member.
Descriptive metadata are reused from the DCMI standard In this case, a special value is adopted. In the
dl:others
and include the of the source, its , example in Fig. 2, the “nation” attribute includes 282501
title description
the file and a set of s (typically linking instances of member “Germany” of the GEO.country level,
format subject
to DBpedia resources). Additional metadata include 283549 instances of member “Italy”, and 10345 other val-
cre-
, and any s, as well as ues which cannot be aligned to any member.
ator publisher contributor
the creation and the . Basic statistics such
date license
F ig. 1 Example of source-related
knowledge representation (source
metadata) in the SKG. Dashed
lines link to attribute metadata
1 3

--- PAGE 8 ---
A Graph RAG Approach to Enhance Explainability in Dataset Discovery 37
Fig. 2 Example of source-related knowledge representation in the SKG (attribute metadata)
4.1 Request Formulation and Enrichment
4 Methodology
The initial step of the workflow involves the definition of
The proposed approach for enhancing explainability in the user request and its enrichment through background
dataset discovery is structured around a Graph Retrieval- knowledge from the Knowledge Graph, with the aim to pro-
Augmented Generation (Graph RAG) framework. As duce the starting prompt to the LLM.
shown in Fig. 3, the architecture integrates multiple com- The request, representing the objective of the analysis, is
ponents to transform user requests in natural language into expressed by the user in natural language. We do not assume
actionable and explainable dataset discovery results. The that the user has full knowledge of the indicators available
contextualization of the user request ensures the system in the data sources or the analysis dimensions these sources
fully understands the user’s intent and prepares the request include, nor their hierarchical structure across levels. Simi-
for downstream processing. larly, while the users may receive guidance through a GUI,
The LLM plays a dual role in the approach. First, it con- typically in the form of examples, they are free to formu-
verts enriched user requests into executable queries. Sec- late their request using their preferred linguistic structure
ond, it synthesizes the final results, incorporating statistical and syntax, without any predefined constraints. An example
insights, semantic explanations, and user preferences into a of an analytical request is “I want to analyze the trends
coherent response. Its natural language capabilities are key of PM2.5 air pollution by country and on a daily basis”,
to maintaining a user-centric, explainable interface. where the subject of measurement can be expressed in vari-
The workflow is managed by a module for coordination, ous alternative wordings, such as “particulate matter below
which is not depicted in Fig. 3. It is in charge of providing 2.5 micron” or “fine particulate”. Similarly, the dimensions
input to the next stage and collecting the relative output, may be phrased differently, e.g., “nation and day” or “daily
thus serving as an orchestrator of the workflow. at country-level”.
1 3

--- PAGE 9 ---
38 C. Diamantini et al.
Fig. 3 Architecture of the Graph RAG approach
The request can be supplemented by one or more prefer- allowed for the prompt of the LLM or to limit its number
ences about the content of the data sources, such as “I am of tokens. In these situations, the request can be prelimi-
particularly interested in results for Europe in the first half nary interpreted and categorized according to some criteria.
of 2024”. Preferences are used at a later stage of the work- For instance, in multi-purpose data catalogs organized on
flow to drive the ranking of the alternative results. a domain basis, the indicators and dimensions most rele-
The approach is summarized in Algorithm 1. The enrich- vant to the identified topic of interest can be prioritized and
ment of the user request involves the extraction of con- included as context, e.g., if the request deals with environ-
textual knowledge from the Knowledge Graph about the mental pollution, indicators on gender balance or employ-
terminology used in the organization for indicators (line ment rate are unlikely to be useful for the analysis, and can
1), dimensions and corresponding levels (line 2). Extracted be left out of the contextual part of the prompt. Further
information for indicators includes their full name along practical optimizations can be devised, such as employing
with properties such as the textual description, the unit of a stateful or hybrid interaction mode with the LLM, reusing
measure and the measurement objective. To make an exam- (a part of) the context.
ple, the following information are added to the prompt about
the indicator CO2: “CO2 (Carbon Dioxide, greenhouse 4.2 Query generation and validation
gas), measured in ppm (parts per million)”. As for dimen-
sions, their names and the set of their levels are extracted The following step consists in translating the user request,
and used for the enrichment, e.g. “Dimension ‘GEO’ has complemented with the encoded contextual knowledge, into
levels: continent, country, region and city.” Since the size a valid query for the dataset discovery platform. In the fol-
of the dimensional hierarchies is not critical in most real- lowing, we introduce the notion of well-defined query.
world scenarios, a static enrichment with all indicators in ,
I
dimensions in D and corresponding levels in the Knowledge Definition 5 (Well-defined query) A well-defined query is a
Graph is suitable for most practical cases. A more dynamic tuple Q= , , where = ind ,...,ind
⟨I
Q
L
Q
⟩ I
Q
{
1 nQ}⊆I
approach to enrichment can be employed when the size of is a set of indicators, = ,..., such that
L
Q
{L
1
L
mQ}
the dimensional hierarchy exceeds the maximum length , , D , D :D =D , is a set of
j z Q j h z g h g
∀L L ∈L L ∈ L ∈ ̸
1 3

--- PAGE 10 ---
A Graph RAG Approach to Enhance Explainability in Dataset Discovery 39
levels representing the dimensional pattern at which the approaches, both with pre-trained Language Models [e.g.,
result is requested. 4] and general-purpose ones [e.g., 36].
Instruction-tuning [51] is meant to drive the LLM in the
The formal specification of the syntax for a query can be generation of the correct output, in this case a query aligning
expressed in Extended Backus-Naur Form (EBNF): with the right syntax and semantics. Along with the syntax
In our example case, the user is interested in analyzing for a well-formed query, the prompt also includes exam-
PM and PM indicators aggregated by country and ples of queries, following the few-shot learning prompting
2.5 10
year levels. Let the input textual request be: “I want to approach [50]. This technique involves providing a small
analyze particulate matter emissions by country and year, set of well-structured examples of well-formed queries.
with a focus on Europe and the last 3 years”. The user’s These examples showcase the correct format, structure, and
request is translated in the following well-formed query: use of indicators and dimensions ensuring that the query
Pollution_PM2.5,Pollution_PM10 , GEO. aligns with the syntax and semantics of the dataset discov-
⟨{ } {
country,TIME.year , where GEO.country and TIME. ery platform. With respect to zero-shot prompting, which
}⟩
year respectively refer to the levels country of dimension does not include any examples and only relies on the knowl-
GEO and the level year of dimension TIME. edge of the model, few-shot learning is capable of steering
It is worth noting that, despite the apparent simplicity the model towards the right goal, obtaining more accurate
of the query language, the kind of queries we can manage responses with fewer hallucinations or ambiguities. A vali-
fall into the classical Selection-Projection-Join (SPJ) class. dator is then used to verify the query’s syntactic correctness
Projection is clearly defined by the specification of the set and possibly drive its re-generation. Finally, in order to deal
of indicators and levels, while joins are automatically dis- with incomplete or ambiguous user requests that can be mis-
covered by one of the most prominent features of the data- interpreted, the LLM is required to abstain from generating
set discovery system proposed, thus relieving the user from low-confidence outputs. To this aim, we employ a prompt-
explicit definition of join conditions. Selection is managed ing-based approach in which the prompt includes specific
as well. In practice, desired conditions on data values are instructions to reject the task if this is not clear enough. An
specified as soft requirements in the form of user prefer- example of an ambiguous request is “I want to analyse pol-
ences in the textual request (e.g. “with a focus on Europe lution”, which does not clarify neither which specific pol-
and the last 3 years” in the previous example), and managed lution indicator to select among the available ones, nor the
at a later stage, when ranking is performed. analysis dimensions. In such cases, the LLM will reply a
We also like to note that, for the sake of simplicity, we do feedback to the user to disambiguate the request.
not introduce aggregation operators here, in the view of the The query generation procedure is summarized in Algo-
fact that aggregation is performed on the result of the source rithm 1. Once dimensional levels and indicators have been
discovery step, although in principle the underlying system extracted, as seen in the previous subsection, a prompt is pro-
would be able to manage it. duced (function write_query_prompt, line 6) and submitted
The actual generation of the query is performed by the to the LLM for the query generation (line 7). The obtained
LLM through a prompt which includes a set of instructions query is then validated in order to identify possible syntac-
along with the user request and the contextual knowledge tic errors (line 8). In case the query is valid, it is returned
about available indicators and dimensional hierarchies. This along with the successful status (lines 9-10). Conversely,
approach is named Semantic Parsing, and refers to the pro- the patch_prompt function (line 12) is called to adjust the
cess of translating natural language into a structured formal prompt taking into account the identified syntax error, and
representation, such as a query in a specific database or the loop continues with the updated version. The process
knowledge graph query language. The use of LLM for this goes on a number of times up to MAX_ATTEMPTS. In case
task has been experimented in the Literature with various no valid query can be generated, the function returns a tuple
1 3

--- PAGE 11 ---
40 C. Diamantini et al.
including an empty query and the unsuccessful status. As of the sources discussed in Sect. 3. This is a peculiar fea-
such, the procedure implements an iterative and feedback- ture of our approach, whereas many works in the Literature
driven approach to translating natural language requests require the exploration of the search space during query
into structured queries, leveraging a prompt patching mech- execution.
anism to improve generation results when needed.
Algorithm 1 Request enrichment and query generation
4.3 Dataset Discovery Given the user’s request
Pollution_PM2.5,Pollution_PM10 ,
⟨{ }
The following step involves the submission of the query to GEO.country, TIME.year , a possible solution can
{ }⟩
the dataset discovery platform to identify a set of solutions. be a set of two sources S ,S where S has an attribute
1 2 1
{ }
To determine whether a data source can be used to com- mapping to Pollution_PM2.5 indicator and S has an
2
pute an answer to a query, a requirement is that it must have attribute mapping to Pollution_PM10 indicator. Both
a compatible dimensional schema, i.e., the source must sources have the dimensional schema compatible with the
include the same levels as the query. In many practical sce- query, i.e., they contain columns which map to dimensional
narios, this constraint can be relaxed by considering a source levels GEO.country and TIME.year. The user obtains the
compatible if it includes a super-set of the query’s levels. requested information when joining together S and S
1 2
In such cases, roll-up relations can be leveraged to provide using the attributes mapped to GEO.country and TIME.year
data at the appropriate aggregation level, as outlined in [12]. as join attributes.
It is worth noting that multiple solutions, i.e., alternative
4.3.1 Solutions Discovery sets of sources satisfying the conditions, can be retrieved
by the discovery platform. Such solutions will be provided
A solution for a query is a set of data sources that (i) have a to the user to let them select the one most suitable to their
dimensional schema compatible with the query and, when needs. In order to reduce the number of candidate solutions,
joined together, (ii) provide the requested set of indicators. pre-filtering is done by removing those solutions in which
In order to be actionable, the sources in a solution need to the cardinality of the join is very small. This can happen
be joined using the levels in the dimensional schema as join when joining sources with non-overlapping content, e.g.,
attributes. joining a source about pollution in Europe and a source
about pollution in the Far East would result in an empty
Definition 6 (Solution to a query) Given a query result set, although the dimensional schema is the same.
Q= Q , Q , a solution S is a combination of data sources However, an exact calculation of the joins would be highly
⟨I L ⟩
S ,...,S , such that (i) =dim(S ), i=1,...,n inefficient in case of a very large dataset repository such as a
1 n Q i
{ } L ∀
and (ii) ind(▷◁n S ). Data Lake or a Data Space. For such a reason, the platform
I Q ⊆ i=1 i
employs an algorithm to compute an approximate evalu-
A solution is generated by the platform by exploiting the ation of the cardinality, through hashing schemes such as
mappings between the Knowledge Graph and the metadata MinHash [7] and LSHEnsemble for approximate evaluation
1 3

--- PAGE 12 ---
A Graph RAG Approach to Enhance Explainability in Dataset Discovery 41
of set containment [57]. The estimated cardinality is also actual distribution, as it is computed on each attribute of the
used to provide a basic ranking of the alternative solutions. sources separately.
Finally, the result set of the dataset discovery step is
4.3.2 Estimation of the Profile for a Solution defined as follows.
In order to support the users in the choice among multiple Definition 8 (Result set) Given a query Q, its result is a set
solutions, summary information of the content of each solu- R Q = Z 1 ,...,Z r , where Z i = Si ,E i is a tuple includ-
{ } ⟨ ⟩
tion is provided in terms of data distribution of the result of ing a solution Si and its estimated profile E i .
the join. Again, exact profiling would be infeasible in Big
Data scenarios. For such a reason, we complement each As shown in Algorithm 2, the procedure starts with the exe-
solution Si with its estimated profile E i , which represents cution of the query on the dataset discovery platform (line
the estimated distribution of values for each level of the 2). Then, for each retrieved solution Si , the estimated profile
dimensional schema. As such, the estimated profile provides is computed (lines 4-8): in particular, for each data source
an explanation of Si in terms of the estimated distribution of S j in Si its profile π j is extracted from the SKG (line 6)
the data resulting from joining the data sources in Si . and appended to the list of profiles P i for the solution (line
7). Then, its estimated profile E is computed (line 8) and
i
Definition 7 (Estimated profile) Given a query added to the result set R (line 9).
Q
Q= , with = L ,...,L and a solu-
Q Q Q 1 m
⟨I L ⟩ L { }
tion S= S
1
,...,S
n
, we denote the estimated profile 4.4 Preference-Oriented Solution Ranking and
{ }
of S by a set E = Ψ e (L 1 ),...,Ψ e (L m ) . We denote by Explanation
{ }
Ψ (L )= m,y m L ,y 0 the estimated profile
e j e j e
{⟨ ⟩| ∈ ≥ }
of a level L , where the value y represents the estimated The last step of the workflow consists in ranking the solu-
j e
number of values aligned with member m δ(L ) in the tions produced by the dataset discovery platform according
j
∈
result of the join ▷◁n S . to the user preferences and providing the user with a textual
i=1 i
report including the rank and a comparison of the solutions.
Operationally, given a level L , the profile Ψ (L ) is cal- As summarized in Algorithm 2, this task is performed
j e j
culated as the intersection of profiles of attributes of all by the LLM. At first, a prompt is built including (1) a set
sources in Si which map to the same level L j . On the other of instructions on the task to perform (reported in Sect. 5,
hand, the value y can be estimated in several ways. In this (2) the user preference expressed in the original request,
e
work, we rely on a histogram-based approach assuming (3) the list of solutions S1 ,...,Sm } and their estimated
{
independence of the dimensional attributes, which is a sim- profiles E ,...,E } and (4) background knowledge on
1 m
{
ple yet efficient approach and one of the most adopted solu- the dimensional levels of the query (line 10). The instruc-
tions for industrial DBMSs [29]. Denoting by o ,...,o tions are aimed to make the task of ranking and comparison
1 n
the number of occurrences of a member m in S ,...,S , explicit. The report will focus on explaining the differences
1 n
the number of occurrences of m in the join of S ,...,S among the solutions, especially with respect to user prefer-
1 n
is min(o ,...,o ). Therefore, we take this value as an ences. In case a ranking is not computable due to ambiguous
1 n
≤
upper bound for y . This is motivated by the fact that each user preferences, the original ranking of the dataset discov-
e
record in a source has a unique combination of values for ery is preserved (only based on estimated cardinality). The
the dimensional schema (we rely on the classical definition report will only focus on describing the different solutions.
of relation as a set). Finally, the prompt is submitted to the LLM (line 11) and
To give an example, let us consider the profiles of two the response is returned to the user, in the form of a report
attributes from two sources a S and a S , both including the rank and an explanation comparing the solu-
x 1 y 2
∈ ∈
mapped to level GEO.country. The profile of the former is tions. To this aim, we refer to the following definition of
<Italy, 20>, <France, 70>, <Germany, 10> , while the explainability, adapted from the general definition proposed
{ }
one for the latter is <Italy, 200>, <Spain, 400>, <Portugal, in Chazette et al. [11].
{
350>, <France, 50> . The cardinalities of the sources are
}
100 for S and 1000 for S . Since Italy occurs 20 times in Definition 9 (Explainable ranking for dataset discovery)
1 2
a and 200 times in a , the upper bound for the number of
1 2
occurrences in the join is min(20,100)=20. As a result, A ranked set R of solutions for a query Q is explain-
rank
Ψ (GEO.country)= <Italy, 20>, <France, 50> . Please able with respect to a user A and preference P, if and only if
e
{ }
note that, in general, the intersection can overestimate the there exists an explanation E such that:
1 3

--- PAGE 13 ---
42 C. Diamantini et al.
E =Understanding(A,R ,P)
| rank the output of the dataset discovery platform to incorpo-
rate explainability. This approach is model-agnostic, as it
where E is a structured natural language report satisfying does not rely on the internal mechanisms of the underlying
the following conditions: retrieval model.
Considering our example case and the query
(i) Preference interpretation: the system identifies, extracts, Pollution_PM2.5,Pollution_PM10 , GEO.
⟨{ } {
and represents preferences P in a form usable for rank- country,TIME.year , let us assume the dataset discov-
}⟩
ing decisions; ery platform responds providing a result set R formed by
Q
(ii) Justification of Ranking: E justifies the ordering of items four distinct solutions. Each solution (Si = S
i1
,...,S
in
)
{ }
in R by showing how dataset profiles and domain includes a set of data sources that, once joined, are capable
rank
knowledge align to P; of responding to the user request. In Fig. 4, the estimated
(iii) Intent Alignment Evaluation: A can assess whether the profiles (E ) for each solution are illustrated as a pair of his-
i
system’s interpretation of P aligns with the intended pri- tograms for the two required dimensions, showing the esti-
oritization criteria. mated distribution of, respectively, the GEO.country and the
TIME.year dimensions. The occurrences (y-axis) are nor-
According to the definition, the system (i) must be able to malized with respect to the total number of rows provided by
accurately identify and interpret the implicit and explicit the joins. In the absence of further support, the user should
preferences expressed. For instance, the user might say “I manually analyze the resulting profiles and figure out which
want recent datasets relevant to particulate matter in Amer- solution is best aligned with their needs. This process can be
ica” and the system must understand not just keywords, but time-consuming and may become unfeasible in real-world
also concepts like recency, geography, or domain-specific scenarios where both the number of solutions and the num-
relevance. Then, (ii) the explanation should explicitly link ber of distinct members in sources’ profiles can be huge. In
features of the solutions (in the form of profiles) to user order to address this issue, the system returns a ranking of
preferences, so it is not enough to justify that a solution is the obtained solutions based on the user’s preferences, along
better than the other, as users need to know why, e.g., “Solu- with natural language explanations of the reasons behind
tion A includes American countries and the last five years”, the ranking. In this example case, the user expresses prefer-
which matches the preferences on the geographic and tem- ences for “European countries” and “the last 3 years”. Thus,
poral dimension. Furthermore, (iii) the user must have the the system should identify S2 as the best solution since it
possibility to evaluate whether the system understood them contains data regarding years 2023-2025 and European
correctly. countries. The solution S1 does not contain occurrences on
According to the categorization proposed in Bernard and 2023 2025 but could still be interesting since it has only
−
Balog [5], our approach to explainability operates at the European data. Solutions S3 and S4 represent those of least
local explanation level describing the relationship between interest as they have neither data on 2023-2025 nor a major-
a specific input (i.e., query result) and output (i.e., the rank- ity of European countries. All this information is returned
ing). The explanations are presented in a textual format by the system in natural language, making the explanations
and are implemented as a post-processing step, modifying easy to understand by even less-experienced users.
Algorithm 2 Discovery and ranking
1 3

--- PAGE 14 ---
A Graph RAG Approach to Enhance Explainability in Dataset Discovery 43
Fig. 4 Example case: estimated profiles for the four solutions of the dataset discovery platform
5 Evaluation discovery. An evaluation of the dataset discovery platform
(Fig. 3, step 4) is available in a previous work [13].
This section is devoted to describing experiments aimed at
evaluating the performance of a prototypical implementa-
tion of the proposed Graph RAG-based approach for dataset
1 3

--- PAGE 15 ---
44 C. Diamantini et al.
5.1 Experimental Setup a comparative analysis both between different proprietary
models and between proprietary and open source models.
In order to evaluate the proposed dataset discovery platform, The details of the experiments and the results are presented
we developed a prototype following a Service-Oriented in the following subsections. For a complete list of tested
Architecture, where each functionality (both for graph man- prompts and corresponding outputs, please refer to the proj-
agement and dataset search) is provided as a service. The ect repository at h t t p s : / / g i t h u b . c o m / K D M G / g r a p h _ R A G _ d
prototype was implemented in Python 3.7, using Flask as a a t a s e t _ d i s c o v e r y.
micro-framework to deploy RESTful services. Experiments
were carried out on datasets monitoring air pollutants, such 5.2 Query Generation
as CO and PM , aggregated by geographical, tempo-
2 2.5
ral, and sectoral dimensions. The BKG represents pollutant The system’s ability to generate queries was evaluated using
indicators and the following dimensions: GEO, TIME, and 22 user requests, 6 of which contained vague/imprecise
SECTOR. The dimension levels are: instructions and/or typos, and 2 were malformed, including
ambiguity or mistakes, to evaluate the system’s response in
● GEO dimension: region, country, and continent; more complex scenarios. The prompt structure was opti-
● TIME dimension: month and year; mized through a prompt engineering phase in order to get
● SECTOR dimension: macro-sector and subsector. better answers from the LLM. Prompts contained the fol-
lowing information:
To structure the schema, extract air pollutants and obtain
value distributions in the different dimensional levels, we ● a brief specification of the task to be performed;
referred to real-world datasets from the Climatetrace6, ● a description of the indicators and the dimensions con-
Ourworldindata7 and European Data8 repositories. We tained in the datasets;
considered a total of 24 air pollutants gathered from all ● the expected syntax of the query;
the repositories (CO2, CO2e-100, CO2e-20, CH4, N2O, ● some examples of well-defined queries;
PM2.5, PM10, NMVOCs, CO, NH3, NOx, SO2, BC, OC, ● instructions on how to deal with vague or imprecise
AS, CD, CR, CU, HG, NI, PB, SE, SOx, ZN) and 10 macro- requests;
sectors (Agriculture, Buildings, Fluorinated Gases, Fossil ● the user request (e.g., "I want to analyse pollution
Fuel Operations, Forestry and Land Use, Manufacturing, (PM2.5 and CO2) by country and year").
Mineral Extraction, Power, Transportation, Waste) each
divided into its subsectors from the Climatetrace repository. The option to answer “Not sure” or to ask the user for
We performed three different typologies of experiments clarification was given if the system was not able to gen-
on the datasets: erate a query with certainty based on the information
provided. As reported in Table 1, the system was capable
● query generation: we tested the system’s ability to gen- of correctly manage all cases. In particular, it provided a
erate well-formed queries based on user requests or, if well-formed query in 16 out of 22 cases. These queries
this is not possible, to fall back to requesting clarifica- were syntactically correct as they respected the format
tion from the user; set_of_indicators , set_of_dimension_levels
⟨{ } { }⟩
● solutions ranking: we evaluated solutions rankings pro- described in Sect. 4.2, while the specified indicators and
posed by the system based on user preferences. dimensions were coherent with the provided lists of existing
● explainability: we evaluate the LLMs’ ability to provide indicators and dimensions. In 4 cases, which correspond to
sound explanations to the provided solutions rankings. ambiguous requests the answer “Not sure” was generated
with the request of clarification. Finally, in 2 cases, corre-
For what concerns the considered LLMs, we used the GPT- sponding to ambiguous and malformed requests, the sys-
4o model available through the OpenAI APIs9 for the exper- tem produces a query that was correctly assessed as invalid
iment on query generation and we compared three different by the Query Validation, and therefore returned to the user
LLMs, namely GPT-4o, DeepSeek-R1 and Llama-70b in for clarification. In general, the system was able to generate
the other experiments. The LLMs were chosen to allow for correct queries in all cases where the user request contained
sufficient information on indicators and aggregation levels,
6 https://climatetrace.org/data. i.e., from case 1 to case 14. It can be noticed that in case
7 https://ourworldindata.org/. 12 (“I want to analyse air pollution aggregated by region,
8 https://data.europa.eu/. month and sector"), the system correctly identifies the indi-
9 h t t p s : / / o p e n a i . c o m / i n d e x / o p e n a i - a p i /. API calls have been submitted cators related to air emissions and, in absence of further
on May 2025.
1 3

--- PAGE 16 ---
A Graph RAG Approach to Enhance Explainability in Dataset Discovery 45
Table 1 User requests and results for the query generation experiment
Case Prompt Response
1 I want to analyse pollution (PM2.5 and <{pollution_PM2_5, pollution_CO2}, {GEO.country, TIME.year}>
CO2) by country and year
2 I want data sources which measure CH4 <{pollution_CH4}, {GEO.country, TIME.year, SECTOR.macrosector}>
emissions by country, year and macro
sectors
3 Gather data about PM2.5 aggregated by <{pollution_PM2_5}, {GEO.region, TIME.year, SECTOR.subsector}>
region and subsector for all the years
4 I would like to join data sources con- <{pollution_NH3, pollution_CO2}, {GEO.country, TIME.year, SECTOR.subsector}>
taining NH3 and CO2 pollutants where
indicators are aggregated by country, year
and subsectors
5 I wish to analyse CH4, CO and PM10 air <{pollution_CH4, pollution_CO, pollution_PM10}, {GEO.country, TIME.month, SEC-
pollution indicators measured by country TOR.subsector}>
and months, also with information about
subsectors
6 Collect data sources containing PM10 <{pollution_PM10}, {GEO.country, TIME.year}>
values for all the countries and years
7 Find all the datasets with regions, months <{pollution_NOx}, {GEO.region, TIME.month, SECTOR.subsector}>
and subsectors, and NOx values
8 I want to analyse country data and the <{pollution_CO2}, {GEO.country}>
emissions of CO2
9 Gimme data aggregated by region and <{pollution_CO2, pollution_CO2e100, pollution_CO2e20, pollution_CH4, pollution_
subsector for all the years N2O, pollution_PM2_5, pollution_PM10, pollution_NH3, pollution_SOx, pollution_SO2,
pollution_CO, pollution_NOx, pollution_NMVOCs, pollution_BC, pollution_OC, pollu-
tion_AS, pollution_CD, pollution_CR, pollution_CU, pollution_HG, pollution_NI, pollu-
tion_PB, pollution_SE, pollution_ZN}, {GEO.region, TIME.year, SECTOR.subsector}>
10 Collect greenhouse gas emissions for <{pollution_CO2, pollution_CO2e100, pollution_CO2e20, pollution_CH4, pollution_
country, year and subsector N2O}, {GEO.country, TIME.year, SECTOR.subsector}>
11 Find datasets containing CO2 measured <{pollution_CO2}, {GEO.country, TIME.year}>
by geography and temporal dimensions
12 I want to aanlyse air pollution aggregated <{pollution_CO2, pollution_CO2e100, pollution_CO2e20, pollution_CH4, pollution_
by region, month and sector N2O, pollution_PM2_5, pollution_PM10, pollution_NH3, pollution_SOx, pollution_SO2,
pollution_CO, pollution_NOx, pollution_NMVOCs, pollution_BC, pollution_OC,
pollution_AS, pollution_CD, pollution_CR, pollution_CU, pollution_HG, pollution_NI,
pollution_PB, pollution_SE, pollution_ZN}, {GEO.region, TIME.month, SECTOR.
macrosector}>
13 Find data about PM10 and PM2.5 for <{pollution_PM10, pollution_PM2_5}, {SECTOR.macrosector}>
sectors
14 Find particulate matter emissions in datas- <{pollution_PM2_5, pollution_PM10}, {GEO.continent, TIME.year}>
ets with continents and years
15 I would like to obtain data about CO2, <{pollution_CO2, pollution_NOx}, {GEO.region, TIME.month, SECTOR.subsector}>
NOx and NO2 for each region, month and
subsector
16 I want to analyse pollution Not sure
17 Give me data about air emissions aggre- <{pollution_CO2, pollution_CH4, pollution_N2O, pollution_PM2_5, pollution_PM10,
gated by industry pollution_NH3, pollution_SOx, pollution_SO2, pollution_CO, pollution_NOx, pollu-
tion_NMVOCs, pollution_BC, pollution_OC}, {SECTOR.macrosector}>
18 Gather data suorces contianing SO2, C4H Not sure
and AS for cities and centuries
19 Give me results for SO2, Nox and N2O Not sure
20 I want pollutant indicators for cities Not sure
21 Sector by year and country < { },{GEO.country, TIME.year, SECTOR.macrosector} >
22 Year by year and sector < { },{TIME.year, SECTOR.macrosector} >
Responses in bold are correctly identified as ambiguous/invalid and returned for clarification
1 3

--- PAGE 17 ---
46 C. Diamantini et al.
specifications, aggregates at the highest level of the sector A preliminary evaluation was manually performed by three
dimension (SECTOR.macrosector). Similar considerations human evaluators, who were not among the authors and had
can be made for case 17 (“Give me data about air emissions no familiarity with the work. They were asked to rank the
aggregated by industry"), where the LLM also associates solutions based on the information provided in the prompt.
the term “industry” to the sector dimension. User requests Their rankings were considered as the ground truth and used
containing slang words (e.g., “Gimme [...]" in case 9) and/ for the evaluation of the results of the LLMs. In cases where
or typos (e.g., “I want to aanlyse [...]" in case 12) are also there was no complete agreement among the annotators, the
correctly interpreted, making the system robust to stylistic best ranking was chosen using a majority voting criterion.
differences and typing errors in prompt writing. In case 15 The agreement among rankings proposed by the human
(“I would like to obtain data about CO2, NOx and NO2 for evaluators was evaluated through the Krippendorff’s alpha
each region, month and subsector"), where the prompt asks coefficient [27], which is defined as:
for the NO2 indicator, which does not exist in the datasets,
D
the system ignores the request for such an indicator and pro- α=1 o
vides a query that only extracts the other two existing indi- − D e
cators (e.g., CO2, NOx). In case of very vague queries (e.g.,
“I want to analyse pollution" in query 16) the system cor- where:
rectly responds “Not sure” to point out the lack of sufficient
information for a correct generation of the query. For cases ● D o : Observed disagreement, calculated as the sum of
21 and 22, the request itself was malformed, despite using differences between observed pairs of evaluations.
valid terminology. Although the Query Generation module ● D e : Expected disagreement, calculated as the disagree-
produced a query, it was correctly flagged as invalid, and ment expected by chance.
returned back. As a result, the system asked the user for
clarification at the second iteration. The observed disagreement D is calculated as:
o
5.3 Solutions Ranking D = δ2(v ,v ) o o
o c,k c,l c,k c,l
· ·
c Ck<l
∑∈ ∑
In the second experiment, the goal was to evaluate the
preference-oriented solution rankings generated by the The expected disagreement D is calculated as:
e
dataset discovery platform and the corresponding report. To
this purpose, we considered 40 user requests with specific D = δ2(v ,v ) p p
e k l k l
· ·
preferences (e.g., “I prefer data on winter months about k<l
∑
Power subsectors"). These last range from clear and pre-
cise to more ambiguous formulations. For each request, we The definitions for the symbols are the following:
obtained three solutions from the dataset discovery platform
and asked the three LLMs to rank them, based on the user ● C: Set of all items or cases.
preferences. The prompts were structured as follows: ● δ(v c,k ,v c,l ): Distance metric between two values v c,k
and v , often squared difference for numerical data.
c,l
● a role assignment to the LLM; ● o c,k : Observed proportion of evaluators assigning value
● a description of the members of each dimension in the k to item c.
datasets, i.e., background knowledge from the Knowl- ● o c,l : Observed proportion of evaluators assigning value
edge Graph; l to item c.
● the preferences of the user query, expressed in natural ● p k : Proportion of all evaluations assigned to value k.
language; ● p l : Proportion of all evaluations assigned to value l.
● information about the task to be performed, i.e., to rank
the proposed solutions according to user preferences Krippendorff’s alpha coefficient among evaluators was
and explain the criteria used to accomplish this task; α=0.936, which means that evaluators proposed consis-
● for each solution, its estimated profile E (see Definition tent rankings in most cases.
7). To normalize the results, we reported the estimated The rankings proposed by the human evaluators, the
number of values for each member of the estimated pro- majority ranking as well as those generated by the three con-
file as a percentage rather than an absolute value. sidered LLMs, are shown in Table 2. The rankings reported
in the columns Human1, Human2 and Human3 refer to the
solutions, proposed by the respective annotators, which
1 3

--- PAGE 18 ---
A Graph RAG Approach to Enhance Explainability in Dataset Discovery 47
Table 2 Majority ranking of the human evaluators and comparison among the rankings proposed by the three LLMs
Prompt Human1 Human2 Human3 Majority Ranking GPT-4o DeepSeek-R1 Llama-70b
1 CAB CAB ACB ACB
2 CAB CAB ACB CAB
3 ABC ABC ABC BAC
4 BCA BCA BCA BAC
5 CBA CBA CBA BAC
6 CBA CBA CBA CAB
7 ABC ABC ACB CAB
8 CBA CBA CBA CBA
9 BCA CBA CBA CBA CBA
10 BAC BAC CBA CBA
11 BCA ACB BAC - BCA ABC CAB
12 CAB CAB CAB CAB
13 CBA CBA CBA CBA
14 BAC BCA ABC BCA ACB
15 ABC ABC ABC ACB
16 ABC ABC ABC ABC
17 ACB CAB CAB ACB ACB
18 ACB ABC ABC BCA BAC
19 CAB CAB CBA BCA
20 ABC ABC ABC ABC
21 BCA BAC BAC BAC
22 CBA BCA CBA CBA
23 CAB CAB CAB BCA
24 BAC BAC BAC BAC
25 ACB CAB ACB ACB CAB
26 ABC ABC ABC CAB
27 CAB CAB CAB CAB
28 BAC BAC BAC BAC
29 ACB ACB CAB CBA
30 CAB CBA CBA CBA CBA
31 CBA CBA CBA CBA
32 CBA CAB CAB CAB CAB
33 CBA CBA CBA CAB
34 CBA CBA CBA CAB
35 ACB CAB CAB CAB CAB
36 CAB BAC BAC BAC B (incomplete)
37 CAB ACB ACB ACB CAB
38 CAB ACB BAC CAB CAB
39 ACB CAB CAB CAB CAB
40 BCA CAB BCA BAC BAC
Errors 6 12 22
Score 203 179 133
Wrong rankings are in bold
differ from the majority ranking. It can be noted that in one annotators, independently from the number of solutions
case (i.e., prompt #11) no agreement was reached among put in the wrong position;
human annotators due to the complexity of the request, ● an overall score, calculated by assigning 3 points for
which lent itself to various interpretations, and hence we each first position correctly identified, 2 for each second
did not consider that prompt in the evaluation of results. The position and 1 for each third position.
generated rankings were evaluated by means of two metrics:
In Table 2, it may be observed that GPT-4o outperforms the
● the number of errors, i.e. the number of rankings dif- other models, as it makes considerably fewer errors than
ferent from the majority rankings proposed by human other models. The rankings proposed by DeepSeek-R1 are
1 3

--- PAGE 19 ---
48 C. Diamantini et al.
Table 3 Comparison between the rankings proposed by GPT-4o with For what concerns the best model, i.e. GPT-4o, it can be
and without information from the Knowledge Graph
observed that the system proposed the best ranking in 33
Prompt Majority ranking GPT-4o GPT-4o w/o KG
out of 39 (84.6%) considered cases, while in an additional
1 CAB CAB ACB
case (2.5%) the evaluators could not reach a consensus on
2 CAB CAB CAB
a definitive best ranking. This demonstrated the ability of
3 ABC ABC ABC
GPT-4o to interpret user preferences and generate correct
4 BCA BCA BCA
5 CBA CBA BAC rankings. In detail, for 24 out of 33 correct rankings (73%),
6 CBA CBA CBA all the evaluators agreed with its ranking, while in 9 rank-
7 ABC ABC ACB ings out of 33 (27%) one evaluator proposed a different
8 CBA CBA CBA solution.
9 CBA CBA CBA After determining the best model, a second experiment
10 BAC BAC CAB was designed to evaluate the impact of the information
11 - BCA BAC coming from the Knowledge Graph on the final ranking.
12 CAB CAB CAB
To this purpose, we removed such an information from
13 CBA CBA CBA
the prompts and we sent them again to the best performing
14 BCA ABC BCA
model, namely GPT-4o. The results are shown in Table 3. It
15 ABC ABC A (incomplete)
is evident that the information coming from the Knowledge
16 ABC ABC BAC
Graph significantly improves the results: in fact, the number
17 CAB CAB ACB
18 ABC ABC BAC of incorrect rankings increases from 6 to 15, while the score
19 CAB CAB CAB is reduced from 203 to 166 (−18.2%). It is also interesting
20 ABC ABC ABC to notice that, in one case (i.e., prompt #15), the ranking
21 BCA BAC BAC proposed by GPT-4o without KG is incomplete, as only the
22 CBA BCA CBA first position is generated.
23 CAB CAB CAB
24 BAC BAC BAC 5.4 Evaluation of Explainability
25 CAB ACB ACB
26 ABC ABC ABC
In order to evaluate the explainability capacity of the three
27 CAB CAB CAB
considered LLMs, the generated responses were evaluated
28 BAC BAC BAC
on a scale from 1 to 5 by three human operators with respect
29 ACB ACB BAC
to two different aspects:
30 CBA CBA CBA
31 CBA CBA CBA
32 CAB CAB CAB ● the coherence of the response, i.e., how accordant the
33 CBA CBA CBA explanation is with prior knowledge and beliefs [35];
34 CBA CBA CAB ● the overall quality of the response, taking into account
35 CAB CAB CAB all aspects (correctness, completeness and comprehensi-
36 BAC BAC BAC bility of the explanation)
37 ACB ACB CAB
38 ACB BAC BAC
The results of the evaluation are shown in Table 4. GPT-4o
39 CAB CAB CAB
gets the best scores in terms of both quality and coherence,
40 CAB BCA BAC
as its explanations resulted to be the most exhaustive and
Errors 6 15
correct. Slightly lower scores are given to DeepSeek-R1’s
Score 203 166
responses while the explanations given by Llama-70b have
Wrong rankings are in bold
the worst coherence and overall quality on average. A com-
mon problem in the responses generated by Llama-70b was
often only partially wrong, since the final score (179) is that they were not able to clearly explain the criteria used for
quite high if compared to the number of errors (12). For the ranking and, sometimes, the explanations provided were
instance, in all prompts except case #10, the ranking gener- not consistent with the data provided as input.
ated by DeepSeek-R1 differs from the optimal one for a sin- Furthermore, we evaluated the compactness of the expla-
gle swap of solutions. Moreover, the rankings generated by nations given by the three LLMs, i.e. the size (expressed in
proprietary models show significantly superior performance terms of number of characters) of the answers, as described
than the considered open source model, namely Llama-70b, in Nauta et al. [35]. The results are shown in Table 5, where
partly due to differences in parameter size. also the standard deviations are reported. Coupled with the
1 3

--- PAGE 20 ---
A Graph RAG Approach to Enhance Explainability in Dataset Discovery 49
Table 4 Evaluation of quality and coherence of the answers given by the LLMs
Prompt Quality Coherence
GPT-4o DeepSeek-R1 Llama-70b GPT-4o DeepSeek-R1 Llama-70b
1 4,67 3,00 3,00 5,00 2,33 3,33
2 5,00 3,00 4,50 5,00 4,00 5,00
3 5,00 4,67 3,00 5,00 5,00 4,33
4 5,00 5,00 3,33 4,67 5,00 4,00
5 5,00 5,00 1,67 4,67 4,67 2,67
6 4,67 5,00 2,67 5,00 5,00 3,00
7 5,00 3,33 2,00 5,00 4,33 2,67
8 5,00 4,67 5,00 5,00 4,67 5,00
9 5,00 4,67 5,00 5,00 4,67 4,00
10 4,33 2,67 2,33 5,00 3,33 3,00
11 4,33 3,67 4,00 5,00 4,33 4,33
12 5,00 5,00 5,00 5,00 4,67 4,67
13 4,33 4,67 4,67 5,00 4,33 5,00
14 3,00 5,00 2,33 4,33 5,00 4,00
15 4,67 4,67 3,00 4,33 5,00 3,00
16 5,00 4,67 4,33 4,67 4,67 4,67
17 4,00 4,00 3,00 4,67 4,33 4,00
18 4,33 3,67 3,00 4,67 5,00 3,33
19 5,00 3,67 2,00 5,00 4,33 2,33
20 4,67 5,00 4,00 5,00 5,00 3,67
21 4,67 4,33 4,00 4,67 4,33 4,00
22 4,00 5,00 4,00 4,00 5,00 4,00
23 5,00 5,00 3,33 5,00 5,00 3,00
24 5,00 5,00 5,00 5,00 5,00 5,00
25 4,33 4,33 5,00 4,33 4,33 5,00
26 4,67 4,67 2,33 4,67 4,67 2,67
27 5,00 4,67 3,67 5,00 4,67 4,00
28 4,67 4,67 4,33 5,00 5,00 4,33
29 5,00 4,67 4,67 5,00 4,33 4,00
30 4,67 4,67 4,67 4,33 4,00 4,33
31 5,00 4,67 4,67 5,00 4,67 5,00
32 4,67 4,67 4,33 5,00 4,67 3,67
33 5,00 4,67 3,33 5,00 5,00 3,00
34 4,67 4,67 2,67 4,67 4,67 2,67
35 5,00 5,00 5,00 5,00 5,00 5,00
36 4,67 4,67 3,33 4,67 4,67 3,67
37 5,00 4,67 3,33 5,00 5,00 3,33
38 3,67 4,00 4,00 4,00 4,00 4,00
39 5,00 5,00 5,00 5,00 5,00 5,00
40 4,00 3,67 3,67 3,67 3,67 3,67
Average 4,67 4,44 3,70 4,78 4,56 3,88
Table 5 Compactness of the explanations given by the three LLMs
words. DeepSeek-R1 produced the longest outputs on
GPT-4o DeepSeek-R1 Llama-70b
average (avg_length=2962.40), followed by GPT-4o (avg_
Average length 2147,05 2962,4 1445,15
length=2147.05), with Llama-70b generating the shortest
Std. Dev 536,93 782,42 416,43
responses (avg_length=1445.15). This suggests that Deep-
Seek-R1 is significantly more verbose in its responses, which
coherence, the compactness allows to better evaluate the could reflect its internal design choices that may encourage
explainability performance: in fact, answers that are both a broader elaboration of explanations. The standard devia-
short (i.e., high compactness) and coherent are an indica- tion (SD) values provide insights into response variability.
tor of a model’s high explainability capacity, as it is more DeepSeek-R1 not only generated the longest outputs but
difficult to give convincing explanations by using few also had the highest variability (SD=782.42), indicating less
1 3

--- PAGE 21 ---
50 C. Diamantini et al.
Funding Cristina Rossetti has received funding from the MUR – DM
consistency in output length. Conversely, GPT-4o displayed
118/2023 as part of the project PNRR-NGEU. Alex Mircoli has re-
moderate variability (SD=536.93), while Llama-70b was ceived funding from the project Vitality – Project Code ECS00000041,
the most consistent (SD=416.43), aligning with its gener- CUP I33C22001330007 - funded under the National Recovery and
ally shorter and more uniform output. However, in this case Resilience Plan (NRRP), Mission 4 Component 2 Investment 1.5 -
‘Creation and strengthening of innovation ecosystems,’ construction
a high compactness is not correlated with high coherence,
of ‘territorial leaders in R&D’ – Innovation Ecosystems - Project ‘In-
as Llama-70b showed the lowest values for that metric. As novation, digitalization and sustainability for the diffused economy in
a consequence, GPT-4o is confirmed as the best option for Central Italy – VITALITY’ Call for tender No. 3277 of 30/12/2021,
correctly generating a ranking and its explanation. and Concession Decree No. 0001057.23-06-2022 of Italian Ministry
of University funded by the European Union – NextGenerationEU.
Availability of data and materials Prompts and results of the evalua-
6 Conclusion
tion are available at h t t p s : / / g i t h u b . c o m / K D M G / g r a p h _ R A G _ d a t a s e t _
d i s c o v e r y.
In this work, we introduced a novel Graph Retrieval-Aug-
mented Generation (Graph RAG) framework to enhance Declarations
the explainability and effectiveness of dataset discovery. By
Competing interests All authors declare that they have no competing
integrating Knowledge Graphs and Large Language Models
interests.
(LLMs), the approach addresses challenges associated with
interpreting heterogeneous data sources and providing user- Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
centric explanations for dataset recommendations. The pro- Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
posed methodology combines enriched query formulation, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format,
as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
leveraging contextual information from Knowledge Graphs,
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate
with advanced LLM capabilities for query generation, solu-
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
tion ranking, and explainable result presentation. article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
Our experimental evaluation, which compared GPT-4o, indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
DeepSeek-R1 and Llama-70b, demonstrated the system’s
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
ability to generate well-formed queries, rank solutions
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
effectively based on user preferences and produce explain- holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o
able results, especially for GPT-4o. The results highlighted r g / l i c e n s e s / b y / 4 . 0 /.
its robustness in handling vague or incomplete requests, as
well as its capacity to enhance user understanding through
References
clear explanations of ranking decisions. The integration of
approximate data profiling further ensures scalability, mak-
1. Abedjan Z, Grütze T, Jentzsch A et al (2014) Profiling and mining
ing the framework suitable for large and complex data eco-
rdf data with prolod++. In: 2014 IEEE 30th International Confer-
systems like Data Lakes and Data Spaces.
ence on Data Engineering, IEEE, pp 1198–1201
This research advances the state-of-the-art in data- 2. Auer S, Demter J, Martin M et al (2012) Lodstats–an extensible
set discovery by addressing the often-overlooked aspect framework for high-performance dataset analytics. In: Knowl-
edge Engineering and Knowledge Management: 18th Interna-
of explainability, which is critical for fostering trust and
tional Conference, EKAW 2012, Galway City, Ireland, October
informed decision-making among users. Future work will
8-12, 2012. Proceedings 18, Springer, pp 353–362
focus on extending the framework to incorporate dynamic 3. Bahr L, Wehner C, Wewerka J et al (2024) Knowledge graph
user feedback, enhancing the semantic parsing capabilities enhanced retrieval-augmented generation for failure mode and
effects analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18114
for query generation with more advanced prompting tech-
4. Banerjee D, Nair PA, Kaur JN et al (2022) Modern baselines for
niques and exploring the applicability of the approach in
sparql semantic parsing. In: Proceedings of the 45th International
further real-world domains. ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Infor-
mation Retrieval, pp 2260–2265
Acknowledgements Authors would like to thank the evaluators for 5. Bernard N, Balog K (2025) A systematic review of fairness,
their assessment of the results. accountability, transparency, and ethics in information retrieval.
ACM Comput Surv 57(6):1–29
6. Bogatu A, Fernandes AA, Paton NW et al (2020) Dataset discov-
Author Contributions Emanuele Storti and Alex Mircoli contributed
ery in data lakes. In: 2020 IEEE 36th international conference on
to the study conception and design. Data collection and experimenta-
data engineering (icde), IEEE, pp 709–720
tion were performed by all authors. The first draft of the manuscript
7. Broder AZ (1997) On the resemblance and containment of
was written by Emanuele Storti, Alex Mircoli, Cristina Rossetti and
documents. In: Proceedings. Compression and Complexity of
Alessandro Mele. All authors reviewed and edited previous versions of
SEQUENCES 1997 (Cat. No. 97TB100171), IEEE, pp 21–29
the manuscript, read and approved the final manuscript.
8. Castelo S, Rampin R, Santos A et al (2021) Auctus: a dataset
search engine for data discovery and augmentation. Proc VLDB
1 3

--- PAGE 22 ---
A Graph RAG Approach to Enhance Explainability in Dataset Discovery 51
Endow 14(12):2791–2794. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 4 7 7 8 / 3 4 7 6 3 1 1 . 3 4 30. Lewis P, Perez E, Piktus A et al (2020) Retrieval-augmented gen-
7 6 3 4 6 eration for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Adv Neural Inf Pro-
9. Castro Fernandez R, Abedjan Z, Koko F et al (2018) Aurum: A cess Syst 33:9459–9474
data discovery system. In: 2018 IEEE 34th International Confer- 31. Marchionini G (2006) Exploratory search: from finding to under-
ence on Data Engineering (ICDE), pp 1001–1012, h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g standing. Commun ACM 49(4):41–46
/ 1 0 . 1 1 0 9 / I C D E . 2 0 1 8 . 0 0 0 9 4 32. Mavromatis C, Karypis G (2024) Gnn-rag: Graph neural
10. Chapman A, Simperl E, Koesten L et al (2020) Dataset search: a retrieval for large language model reasoning. arXiv preprint
survey. VLDB J 29(1):251–272 arXiv:2405.20139
11. Chazette L, Brunotte W, Speith T (2021) Exploring explainabil- 33. Nagel L, Hierro JJ, Perea E et al (2021) Design principles for data
ity: a definition, a model, and a knowledge catalogue. In: 2021 spaces: Position paper. Tech. rep., E. ON Energy Research Center
IEEE 29th international requirements engineering conference 34. Nargesian F, Zhu E, Pu KQ et al (2018) Table union search on
(RE), IEEE, pp 197–208 open data. Proc VLDB Endow 11(7):813–825
12. Diamantini C, Potena D, Storti E (2018) Multidimensional query 35. Nauta M, Trienes J, Pathak S et al (2023) From anecdotal evi-
reformulation with measure decomposition. Inf Syst 78:23–39 dence to quantitative evaluation methods: a systematic review on
13. Diamantini C, Potena D, Storti E (2024) Analytic processing in evaluating explainable ai. ACM Comput Surv. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 .
data lakes: a semantic query-driven discovery approach. Inf Syst 1 1 4 5 / 3 5 8 3 5 5 8
Front 14:1–9 36. Nguyen LM, Le NK, Anh KQ et al (2024) Semantic parsing for
14. Diamantini C, Lo Giudice P, Potena D et al (2021) An approach question and answering over scholarly knowledge graph with
to extracting topic-guided views from the sources of a data lake. large language models. In: JSAI International Symposia on AI, h
Inf Syst Front 23:243–262 t t p s : / / a p i . s e m a n t i c s c h o l a r . o r g / C o r p u s I D : 2 7 0 2 2 7 6 7 3
15. Edge D, Trinh H, Cheng N et al (2024) From local to global: A 37. Oram A (2015) Managing the Data Lake: Moving to Big Data
graph rag approach to query-focused summarization. arXiv pre- Analysis. O’Reilly Media
print arXiv:2404.16130 38. Ouyang L, Wu J, Jiang X et al (2022) Training language models
16. Fernandez RC, Min J, Nava D et al (2019) Lazo: A cardinality- to follow instructions with human feedback. Adv Neural Inf Pro-
based method for coupled estimation of jaccard similarity and cess Syst 35:27730–27744
containment. In: 2019 IEEE 35th International Conference on 39. Peng B, Zhu Y, Liu Y et al (2024) Graph retrieval-augmented
Data Engineering (ICDE), IEEE, pp 1190–1201 generation: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08921
17. Hai R, Geisler S, Quix C (2016) Constance: An intelligent data 40. Procko TT, Ochoa O (2024) Graph retrieval-augmented genera-
lake system. In: Proceedings of the 2016 international conference tion for large language models: A survey. In: 2024 Conference on
on management of data, pp 2097–2100 AI, Science, Engineering, and Technology (AIxSET), IEEE, pp
18. He X, Tian Y, Sun Y et al (2024) G-retriever: Retrieval-aug- 166–169
mented generation for textual graph understanding and question 41. Rafailov R, Sharma A, Mitchell E et al (2024) Direct preference
answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07630 optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model.
19. Helal A, Helali M, Ammar K et al (2021) A demonstration of Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36
kglac: a data discovery and enrichment platform for data science. 42. Rosenfeld A, Richardson A (2019) Explainability in human-agent
Proc VLDB Endow 14(12):2675–2678 systems. Auton Agent Multi-Agent Syst 33:673–705
20. Honovich O, Scialom T, Levy O et al (2023) Unnatural instruc- 43. Sanmartin D (2024) Kg-rag: Bridging the gap between knowl-
tions: Tuning language models with (almost) no human labor. edge and creativity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.12035
In: Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association 44. Santos A, Bessa A, Musco C et al (2022) A sketch-based index
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp for correlated dataset search. In: 2022 IEEE 38th International
14409–14428 Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), IEEE, pp 2928–2941
21. Hoseini S, Theissen-Lipp J, Quix C (2024) A survey on semantic 45. Sawadogo P, Darmont J (2021) On data lake architectures and
data management as intersection of ontology-based data access, metadata management. J Intell Inf Syst 56:97–120
semantic modeling and data lakes. J Web Semant 81:100819 46. Schneider P, Afzal A, Vladika J et al (2023) Investigating con-
22. Hu EJ, Shen Y, Wallis P et al (2022) LoRA: Low-rank adaptation versational search behavior for domain exploration. In: European
of large language models. In: International Conference on Learn- Conference on Information Retrieval, Springer, pp 608–616
ing Representations, h t t p s : / / o p e n r e v i e w . n e t / f o r u m ? i d = n Z e V K e e 47. Sha Y, Feng Y, He M et al (2023) Retrieval-augmented knowl-
F Y f 9 edge graph reasoning for commonsense question answering.
23. Hu Y, Lei Z, Zhang Z et al (2024) Grag: Graph retrieval-aug- Mathematics 11(15):3269
mented generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16506 48. Shrivastava A, Li P (2015) Asymmetric minwise hashing for
24. Huang L, Yu W, Ma W et al (2023) A survey on hallucination indexing binary inner products and set containment. In: Proceed-
in large language models: Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and ings of the 24th international conference on world wide web, pp
open questions. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 981–991
25. Jia M, Tang L, Chen BC et al (2022) Visual prompt tuning. In: 49. Solmaz G, Cirillo F, Fürst J et al (2022) Enabling data spaces:
European Conference on Computer Vision, Springer, pp 709–727 Existing developments and challenges. In: Proceedings of the 1st
26. Kimball R (1996) The data warehouse toolkit: practical tech- International Workshop on Data Economy, pp 42–48
niques for building dimensional data warehouses. John Wiley & 50. Song Y, Wang T, Cai P et al (2023) A comprehensive survey of
Sons Inc few-shot learning: evolution, applications, challenges, and oppor-
27. Krippendorff K (2011) Computing krippendorff’s alpha-reliabil- tunities. ACM Comput Surv 55(13s):1–40
ity. Computing 1 51. Wei J, Bosma M, Zhao VY et al (2022) Finetuned language mod-
28. Langegger A, Woss W (2009) Rdfstats-an extensible rdf statistics els are zero-shot learners. In: ICLR 2022 - 10th International
generator and library. In: 2009 20th International Workshop on Conference on Learning Representations. International Confer-
Database and Expert Systems Application, IEEE, pp 79–83 ence on Learning Representations, ICLR
29. Leis V, Radke B, Gubichev A et al (2017) Cardinality estimation 52. Wei J, Wang X, Schuurmans D et al (2022) Chain-of-thought
done right: Index-based join sampling. In: Cidr prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Adv Neural
Inf Process Syst 35:24824–24837
1 3

--- PAGE 23 ---
52 C. Diamantini et al.
53. Wilkinson MD, Dumontier M, Aalbersberg IJ et al (2016) The 56. Zhao Y, Ravat F, Aligon J et al (2021) Analysis-oriented metadata
fair guiding principles for scientific data management and stew- for data lakes. In: Proceedings of the 25th International Database
ardship. scientific data 3 (2016). Number 1:160018 Engineering & Applications Symposium, pp 194–203
54. Xu Z, Cruz MJ, Guevara M et al (2024) Retrieval-augmented 57. Zhu E, Nargesian F, Pu KQ et al (2016) Lsh ensemble: internet-
generation with knowledge graphs for customer service ques- scale domain search. Proc VLDB Endow 9(12):1185–1196
tion answering. In: Proceedings of the 47th International ACM 58. Zhu E, Deng D, Nargesian F et al (2019) Josie: Overlap set simi-
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information larity search for finding joinable tables in data lakes. In: Proceed-
Retrieval, pp 2905–2909 ings of the 2019 International Conference on Management of
55. Yao S, Zhao J, Yu D et al (2023) React: Synergizing reasoning Data, pp 847–864
and acting in language models. In: International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR)
1 3

